We present the spatiotemporal distribution of microplastics (MP) in surface waters and sediments between 2020 and 2022 in the Bay of Marseille. Microplastics were extracted with an improved, ecological protocol from 27 surface water and 16 sediment samples. The hydrodynamical circulation model MARS3D-RHOMA was used with in-situ data to test the influence of meteorological and hydrodynamic forcing on the concentration of MPs during the study period. The reported concentrations are analogous to abundances previously found in the Bay of Marseille, as well as in similar coastal systems. Average MP concentrations are 5.79 ± 12.71 MP.m−3 in surface water and 855 ± 413 MP.kg−1 dw in sediments. Simulations revealed hydrodynamic features associated with several episodes of Rhone intrusion in the Bay of Marseille. The observed MP concentrations and distribution in February 2020 suggest that the Rhone River’s plume entered the Bay of Marseille.
Climate change poses severe threats to coastal social-ecological systems (SES) worldwide. Recent calls recognize the importance of including Indigenous and local knowledge (ILK) in research on climate change impacts. Yet studies that have attempted to weave ILK and scientific knowledge have seldom considered the gendered nature of climate change impacts. Building on the literature on gender and climate change and knowledge pluralism, this study contributes to addressing this research gap by exploring local knowledge on climate change impacts and its relation to scientific knowledge through a gendered approach and focusing on the Western Indian Ocean region, and more specifically on Kenya. We adopted a mixed methodology combining qualitative and quantitative approaches. We found evidence of pronounced climate change impacts on coastal SES both in the scientific literature and in local reports. Our findings highlight that there is an extensive overlap between information derived from scientific and local knowledge systems. Importantly, our study revealed reports of change that were only provided by SSF communities, namely changes in coastal dynamics, a decrease in rainfall, and a decrease in the abundance of green algae. Although we found gendered variations in changes reported by SSF communities, gendered differences of climate change impacts on SSF were not detected in the reviewed literature. Overall, our results suggest that knowledge cross-fertilization generates a holistic, relational, and place-based view of climate change impacts, which may support sound and gender-inclusive adaptive policies. We conclude by suggesting key policy recommendations for climate adaptation and risk management
The goal of NASA's EXport Processes in the Ocean from RemoTe Sensing (EXPORTS) project is to develop a predictive understanding of the fate of global ocean primary productivity and export of carbon from the surface to the deep ocean. Thorium-234 (234Th, t1/2 = 24.1 d) was used to measure sinking particle export from an anticyclonic eddy during the EXPORTS North Atlantic cruise (May 2021) at the Porcupine Abyssal Plain. The four-week sampling period was broken into three time periods (“epochs”) where 800 234Th seawater samples were collected from over 50 CTD casts with high depth resolution over the upper 500 m. Size-fractioned particulate samples were collected to determine particulate organic carbon (POC) and biogenic silica (bSi) to 234Th ratios using in situ McLane pumps. A 234Th non-steady state model shows an eddy center epoch average progression of increasing 234Th export (∼2800 ± 300 (Epoch 1; standard deviation) to 4500 ± 700 (Epoch 3) dpm m−2 d−1) out of the top 110 m of the water column over the course of the cruise (29 d). This translates into an epoch average progression of ∼11 ± 1 to 14 ± 2 mmol C m−2 d−1 of sinking POC flux, and ∼ 3 ± 1 to 6 ± 1 mmol bSi m−2 d−1 of sinking bSi flux to deeper waters at 110 m. The overall efficiency of the biological carbon pump (amount of net primary production reaching 100 m below the euphotic zone) increases from ∼10% to ∼30% throughout the sampling period. The temporal trends discussed extensively in this paper show that POC and bSi export increase during diatom bloom evolution.
Although women contribute substantially to the small-scale fisheries sector globally, in many countries there is a severe lack of gender-disaggregated data on fishing activities. This gender data gap hampers a comprehensive understanding of small-scale fisheries dynamics with implications for fisheries management and food security. In this study, we investigate women's and men's engagement in small-scale fishing through a case study in coastal Kenya, a region characterized by a high dependence on fisheries for local livelihoods and nutritional needs. We applied a mixed method approach, combining participant observation, photography, semi-structured interviews on gender identities (n = 11) and gendered fishing practices (n = 28), an individual survey (n = 141), and pebble games (n = 35). Our results reveal a marked gendered division of labor across the seascape, with women mostly fishing in intertidal areas and men beyond the reef. Further, we find that women's fishing practices are characterized by less fishing gear, less catch, a lower functional diversity of catches, less fishing effort, and less income than those of men. However, women's catches contribute significantly to local diets, accounting for up to 50% of the fish and seafood consumed in fisherwomen-headed households. Despite women's fishing activities appearing less productive and profitable that those of men, they are important for achieving food security in Kenyan coastal communities. Results from this study contribute to broadening our understanding of the gendered dimensions of small-scale fishing and highlight relevant information for developing gender-inclusive management strategies. We conclude by providing key recommendations for fisheries research, management, and governance.
A significant challenge in global change research is understanding how vegetation interacts with the environment to influence ecosystem gross primary productivity (GPP) through carbon assimilation. One emerging objective is to consistently predict GPP fluctuations worldwide by establishing a robust scaling relationship between GPP measured at flux towers and satellite spectral reflectance data. However, a major hurdle in achieving this goal is the discrepancy in spatial resolution between early satellite measurements and eddy flux measurements. By using a large set of growing season data covering 100 site-years in North and Central America, we explored the potential of transforming incident and reflected shortwave (Rg) and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) measurements into a broadband normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and near-infrared (NIR) reflectance of vegetation (NIRv) which simultaneously explains the GPP variability. We found that the broadband NDVI and NIRv derived from Rg and PAR measurements at the daily time scale were highly correlated with Planet Fusion, Landsat-8/9, and Sentinel-2 narrowband NDVI and NIRv across a wide range of climate and ecological gradients. The differences between satellite and broadband NDVI and NIRv were found to be significantly associated with soil background variations, phenological stages, water stress and signal saturation of broadband NIR reflectance at high biomass. The seasonal variability of broadband NDVI and NIRv remarkably captured the seasonality of vegetation phenology, evaporative fraction, GPP and rainfall in different ecosystems. Although saturation of GPP at high NDVI was evident, a linear relationship between broadband NIRv times incident PAR versus GPP indicated the effectiveness of NIRv-based approach to capture the hidden light use efficiency impacts on GPP. Our study concludes that inexpensive measurement of Rg and PAR components can provide reliable information on NDVI, NIRv, and GPP uninterruptedly. This enhances the sensing capability of flux tower sites without requiring additional spectrometer measurements. The proposed in-situ vegetation indices make a compelling case on using radiation signals for handshaking between ecosystem-scale measurements and remote sensing observables relevant to carbon uptake.
The water column distributions of the alkaline earth metals strontium (Sr) and barium (Ba) were studied along a transect from Hawaii to Alaska. Despite similarity in the chemical properties of Sr and Ba, we find that changes in their concentrations along the transect are governed by different chemical and biological processes, meaning that these elements can be treated as independent variables in modern and ancient environments. Alaskan margin sediments are a particularly important source of dissolved Ba to the North Pacific, likely through a combination of saline submarine groundwater discharge and reductive dissolution of manganese (Mn) oxides. Abyssal North Pacific sediments are also a source of Ba to the bottom waters but a sink for Sr. We find that over 90 % of the water column variability in Sr concentrations is driven by precipitation and dissolution of the celestine (SrSO4) skeletons of Acantharia. However, the high Ba content of Acantharia celestine accounts for only 5–8 % of the global ocean variability in Ba concentrations in the water column. Similarly, the effects of barite (BaSO4) precipitation and/or dissolution on the marine Sr cycle is negligible, accounting for <1 % of the water column concentration structure for Sr and ∼3 % of the sedimentary Sr burial. The Sr-Ba-PO4 concentration distributions in the North Pacific are inconsistent with significant export of barite to the deep ocean and sediment. This suggests most of the barite formed at intermediate depths dissolves at similar horizons to its formation. The Ba content of phytoplankton organic matter is too low to constitute a major source for particulate Ba in the mesopelagic North Pacific, which suggests Ba is concentrated in marine aggregates by heterotrophic micro-organisms.
Orbiting around the non-closure problem in eddy covariance, a new generation of high-resolution thermal imagery has revealed that advection may be more common than previously expected. To investigate this, we conducted an extensive study over an irrigated alfalfa field that experienced heat and moisture advection. Over the course of five analysis periods (37 days total), multiple tower arrays and profile measurements were deployed to measure the horizontal advection and vertical heat flux divergence. Latent heat flux (λE) measured at the anchor tower showed an enhancement (i.e., increase) due to both local and non-local processes. Locally, as a result of the upwind λE, advection humidified the atmosphere and increased stomatal opening, enhancing the downwind λE. Simultaneously, with lowered atmospheric demand, λE was suppressed downwind. Our results suggest that stomatal regulation played a dominant role in the enhancement, but not by itself. Spectral analysis revealed that low frequency (i.e., large) eddies contributed high heat and moisture via advection. In combination with thermal remote sensing observations from ECOSTRESS and Landsat 8/9, we found that these large eddies were generated over the upwind surface, and they were independent of the local boundary layer conditions. Consequently, spatiotemporal heterogeneity in land-surface conditions induced large eddies, further enhancing λE through non-local transport of heat and moisture. Lastly, by conditionally including the advective fluxes, the energy balance closure improved from 89 % to 97 % (r2 = 0.97, p < 0.001) over the five analysis periods. Results from this improved energy balance closure suggest an alternative approach for developing validation datasets for remote sensing evapotranspiration (ET) models rather than forcing closure with Bowen-ratio. Furthermore, our findings provide insights for algorithms that may improve remote sensing ET products that treat pixels as isolated columns rather than also considering the lateral effects of heat and moisture transport.
Coccolithophores are marine calcifying phytoplankton important to the carbon cycle and a model organism for studying diversity. Here, we present CASCADE (Coccolithophore Abundance, Size, Carbon And Distribution Estimates), a new global dataset for 139 extant coccolithophore taxonomic units. CASCADE includes a trait database (size and cellular organic and inorganic carbon contents) and taxonomic-unit-specific global spatiotemporal distributions (Latitude/Longitude/Depth/Month/Year) of coccolithophore abundance and organic and inorganic carbon stocks. CASCADE covers all ocean basins over the upper 275 meters, spans the years 1964-2019 and includes 33,119 gridded taxonomic-unit-specific abundance observations. Within CASCADE, we characterise the underlying uncertainties due to measurement errors by propagating error estimates between the different studies. This error propagation pipeline is statistically robust and could be applied to other plankton groups. CASCADE can contribute to (observational or modelling) studies that focus on coccolithophore distribution and diversity and the impacts of anthropogenic pressures on historical populations. Additionally, our new taxonomic-unit-specific cellular carbon content estimates provide essential conversions to quantify the role of coccolithophores on ecosystem functioning and global biogeochemistry.
Rising carbon dioxide emissions are provoking ocean warming and acidification1,2, altering plankton habitats and threatening calcifying organisms3, such as the planktonic foraminifera (PF). Whether the PF can cope with these unprecedented rates of environmental change, through lateral migrations and vertical displacements, is unresolved. Here we show, using data collected over the course of a century as FORCIS4 global census counts, that the PF are displaying evident poleward migratory behaviours, increasing their diversity at mid- to high latitudes and, for some species, descending in the water column. Overall foraminiferal abundances have decreased by 24.2 ± 0.1% over the past eight decades. Beyond lateral migrations5, our study has uncovered intricate vertical migration patterns among foraminiferal species, presenting a nuanced understanding of their adaptive strategies. In the temperature and calcite saturation states projected for 2050 and 2100, low-latitude foraminiferal species will face physicochemical environments that surpass their current ecological tolerances. These species may replace higher-latitude species through poleward shifts, which would reduce low-latitude foraminiferal diversity. Our insights into the adaptation of foraminifera during the Anthropocene suggest that migration will not be enough to ensure survival. This underscores the urgent need for us to understand how the interplay of climate change, ocean acidification and other stressors will impact the survivability of large parts of the marine realm.
Atmospheric dust deposition can modulate the earth’s climate and atmospheric CO2 through fertilising the ocean (nutrient source) and by accelerating the biological carbon pump through fuelling the ballasting process. To distinguish the biogeochemical effects of Saharan dust with respect to fertilization and ballasting, and to gain a broader perspective on the coccolith calcite Sr/Ca in relation to the drivers of coccolith export production, we determined the coccolith-Sr/Ca from a one-year (2012–2013) time-series sediment trap record in the western tropical North Atlantic (M4—49°N/12°W). High Sr/Ca were linked to enhanced export production in the upper part of the photic zone, most notably under windier, dry, and dustier conditions during spring. Attenuated Sr/Ca in the autumn probably reflect a combination of lower Sr-incorporation by dominant but small-size placolith-bearing species and the presence of “aged” coccoliths rapidly scavenged during a highly productive and usually fast export event, likely added by (wet) dust ballasting. Higher Sr/Ca observed in the large coccolith size fractions support the existing notion that larger-sized coccolithophores incorporate more Sr during calcification under the same environmental conditions. The presence of the abnormally Sr-rich species Scyphosphaera apsteinii is also shown in the separated large fraction of our Sr/Ca seasonal data.
We explore the potential of using a non-parametric statistical method called Alternating Conditional Expectations, ACE, to quantify functional relationships in biogeosciences. Here, ACE is used to quantify the non-linear and multi-faceted responses of greenhouse gas fluxes to a set of biophysical forcings, when the shapes of those response surfaces are unknown. We evaluated the statistical method over two contrasting ecosystems and two contrasting time steps. One case involved quantifying the biophysical controls of water vapor and carbon dioxide (CO2) fluxes over a semi-arid oak savanna using daily integrated fluxes. The other case evaluated the responses of CO2 and methane (CH4) flux measurements to a set of biophysical forcings at a restored tidal wetland using thirty-minute averages. The statistical model, based on 4 independent variables, explained up over 90% of the variation in daily integrated flux densities of water vapor and net carbon dioxide exchange at the savanna site. This fit was defined by distinct non-linear responses to such drivers as gross primary production, photosynthetically active radiation, air temperature, vapor pressure deficit and soil moisture. At the tidal wetland site, we evaluated net carbon dioxide and methane fluxes with short-term measurements to capture the influence of rising and falling tides and seasonality in biological activity. The statistical model defined the shape of the forcing of fluxes due to the roles of carbon exudates, water table depth, oxygen level in the water column, temperature and vegetation status. The statistical fits of the greenhouse gas fluxes were less precise than the savanna case. The fetch varies on a run-to-run basis as it is comprised of a heterogeneous mosaic of open water and vegetation. Furthermore, it is difficult to monitor the environmental conditions of the archaea and bacteria in the sediments that produce methane and carbon dioxide.
Coastal wetlands are hotspots of carbon sequestration, and their conservation and restoration can help to mitigate climate change. However, there remains uncertainty on when and where coastal wetland restoration can most effectively act as natural climate solutions (NCS). Here, we synthesize current understanding to illustrate the requirements for coastal wetland restoration to benefit climate, and discuss potential paths forward that address key uncertainties impeding implementation. To be effective as NCS, coastal wetland restoration projects will accrue climate cooling benefits that would not occur without management action (additionality), will be implementable (feasibility) and will persist over management-relevant timeframes (permanence). Several issues add uncertainty to understanding if these minimum requirements are met. First, coastal wetlands serve as both a landscape source and sink of carbon for other habitats, increasing uncertainty in additionality. Second, coastal wetlands can potentially migrate outside of project footprints as they respond to sea-level rise, increasing uncertainty in permanence. To address these first two issues, a system-wide approach may be necessary, rather than basing cooling benefits only on changes that occur within project boundaries. Third, the need for NCS to function over management-relevant decadal timescales means methane responses may be necessary to include in coastal wetland restoration planning and monitoring. Finally, there is uncertainty on how much data are required to justify restoration action. We summarize the minimum data required to make a binary decision on whether there is a net cooling benefit from a management action, noting that these data are more readily available than the data required to quantify the magnitude of cooling benefits for carbon crediting purposes. By reducing uncertainty, coastal wetland restoration can be implemented at the scale required to significantly contribute to addressing the current climate crisis.
Assessing how different users of a Marine Protected Area perceive environmental changes can contribute to design management strategies. We assess how locals and tourists perceive environmental changes in the Cap de Creus protected area (NW Mediterranean, Spain). To identify locally perceived changes, we first conducted semi-structured interviews with locals (n = 38). Reported environmental changes were then used to construct a survey applied to locals and tourists (n = 427). In semi-structured interviews, environmental changes were the least reported changes compared to economic and social changes; reports of negative environmental changes dominated over reports of positive environmental changes. Overall, all survey participants reported a decline of the health status of the local environment, with locals displaying higher levels of agreement with statements referring to coastal environmental deterioration than tourists. The predominance of responses reporting economic versus environmental changes can be explained by the recent radical transformation of the area towards tourism. Reports of coastal marine area deterioration are in line with available instrumental data. Higher levels of agreement with statements referring to environmental deterioration among locals than among tourists highlight the importance of people’s connection with nature to assess change. Considering that Cap de Creus has been protected for more than two decades, our findings raise concerns regarding its ongoing deterioration and underscore the importance of monitoring the effectiveness of marine protection to modulate management strategies.
Tidal wetlands provide valuable ecosystem services, including storing large amounts of carbon. However, the net exchanges of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) in tidal wetlands are highly uncertain. While several biogeochemical models can operate in tidal wetlands, they have yet to be parameterized and validated against high-frequency, ecosystem-scale CO2 and CH4 flux measurements across diverse sites. We paired the Cohort Marsh Equilibrium Model (CMEM) with a version of the PEPRMT model called PEPRMT-Tidal, which considers the effects of water table height, sulfate, and nitrate availability on CO2 and CH4 emissions. Using a model-data fusion approach, we parameterized the model with three sites and validated it with two independent sites, with representation from the three marine coasts of North America. Gross primary productivity (GPP) and ecosystem respiration (Reco) modules explained, on average, 73% of the variation in CO2 exchange with low model error (normalized root mean square error (nRMSE) <1). The CH4 module also explained the majority of variance in CH4 emissions in validation sites (R2 = 0.54; nRMSE = 1.15). The PEPRMT-Tidal-CMEM model coupling is a key advance toward constraining estimates of greenhouse gas emissions across diverse North American tidal wetlands. Further analyses of model error and case studies during changing salinity conditions guide future modeling efforts regarding four main processes: (a) the influence of salinity and nitrate on GPP, (b) the influence of laterally transported dissolved inorganic C on Reco, (c) heterogeneous sulfate availability and methylotrophic methanogenesis impacts on surface CH4 emissions, and (d) CH4 responses to non-periodic changes in salinity.
Radionuclides can provide key information on the temporal dimension of environmental processes, given their well-known rates of radioactive decay and production. Naturally occurring radionuclides, such as 234Th and 210Po, have been used as powerful particle tracers in the marine environment to study particle cycling and vertical export. Since their application to quantify the magnitude of particulate organic carbon (POC) export in the 1990s, 234Th and, to a lesser extent, 210Po have been widely used to characterize the magnitude of the biological carbon pump (BCP). Combining both radionuclides, with their different half-lives, biogeochemical behaviors, and input sources to the ocean, can help to better constrain POC export and capture BCP dynamics that would be missed by a single tracer. Here, we review the studies that have simultaneously used 234Th and 210Po as tracers of POC export, emphasizing what can be learned from their joint application, and provide recommendations and future directions.
Bird feathers have been widely used as environmental indicators, providing key information on environmental pollution. However, there is little available information on the adsorption of natural radioactivity in bird feathers and consequently, its impact on the field of movement ecology is not yet known. This study investigates the concentration and distribution of 210Pb in wing- and tail-feathers of different bird species with contrasting migratory strategies, and discusses its potential use as a tracer of age and flight times. Adsorption of 210Pb in bird feathers is directly related to the interaction of feathers with air, therefore it is hypothesised that the presence of this radionuclide is proportional to the length of flight times, and is asymmetrically distributed in flight feathers. Consequently, a significant difference is expected between 210Pb concentrations in feathers of long-distance migrants when compared to sedentary species. For this purpose, a total of 45 samples from eight individuals of three bird species with distinct migratory strategies were analysed: a highly aerial and long-distance migratory species (Common swift Apus apus), and two largely sedentary species widely distributed across Europe (Great tit Parus major and Tawny owl Strix aluco). Novel findings show that the content of 210Pb in bird feathers of adult migratory birds is much higher than in sedentary birds or juvenile individuals, demonstrating this naturally occurring radionuclide can provide information about the contact time between feathers and air. Additionally, 210Pb adsorption was not evenly distributed in bird feathers. The findings provide a new method to trace age and flight time of birds using 210Pb in feathers, complementing conventional techniques in bird migration studies.
Methane (CH4) is a potent greenhouse gas (GHG) with atmospheric concentrations that have nearly tripled since pre-industrial times. Wetlands account for a large share of global CH4 emissions, yet the magnitude and factors controlling CH4 fluxes in tidal wetlands remain uncertain. We synthesized CH4 flux data from 100 chamber and 9 eddy covariance (EC) sites across tidal marshes in the conterminous United States to assess controlling factors and improve predictions of CH4 emissions. This effort included creating an open-source database of chamber-based GHG fluxes (https://doi.org/10.25573/serc.14227085). Annual fluxes across chamber and EC sites averaged 26 ± 53 g CH4 m−2 year−1, with a median of 3.9 g CH4 m−2 year−1, and only 25% of sites exceeding 18 g CH4 m−2 year−1. The highest fluxes were observed at fresh-oligohaline sites with daily maximum temperature normals (MATmax) above 25.6°C. These were followed by frequently inundated low and mid-fresh-oligohaline marshes with MATmax ≤25.6°C, and mesohaline sites with MATmax >19°C. Quantile regressions of paired chamber CH4 flux and porewater biogeochemistry revealed that the 90th percentile of fluxes fell below 5 ± 3 nmol m−2 s−1 at sulfate concentrations >4.7 ± 0.6 mM, porewater salinity >21 ± 2 psu, or surface water salinity >15 ± 3 psu. Across sites, salinity was the dominant predictor of annual CH4 fluxes, while within sites, temperature, gross primary productivity (GPP), and tidal height controlled variability at diel and seasonal scales. At the diel scale, GPP preceded temperature in importance for predicting CH4 flux changes, while the opposite was observed at the seasonal scale. Water levels influenced the timing and pathway of diel CH4 fluxes, with pulsed releases of stored CH4 at low to rising tide. This study provides data and methods to improve tidal marsh CH4 emission estimates, support blue carbon assessments, and refine national and global GHG inventories.